Progress Report - January 2024 (#389)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-jan-2024/index.md

As of writing, multiprocess support {{< gh-hovercard "12756" "is not yet merged," >}} but fixes in the GPU, input, and other modules (implemented by byte[], Blinkhawk, and german77) have already been staged and released, allowing full support to be added in parts.

Implementing the requirements to support multiprocess in yuzu led us to make five significant changes in the past month:

- Allow the GPU to run multiple programs. This is where SMMU support comes in, which we will discuss in the next section.
- Rewrite the old, basic applet manager.
- Rewrite presentation. Part of the prerequisites to run more than one program simultaneously is to be able to display all of them to the user.
- Rewrite every other relevant area (for example, input) to support multiple processes.
- Automate the serialization of service calls.

### Device mapping and SMMU

> We start off with a big on: Blinkhawk implemented device memory mapping emulation and rewrote the GPU implementation with support for the {{< gh-hovercard "12579" "SMMU," >}} or for desktop enthusiasts/Linux VM users/UEFI lurkers, its other common name, IOMMU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We start off with a big one: Blinkhawk implemented device memory mapping emulation and rewrote the GPU implementation with support for the {{< gh-hovercard "12579" "SMMU," >}} or for desktop enthusiasts/Linux VM users/UEFI lurkers, its other common name, IOMMU.
```

It was quite bothersome.

It took an entire {{< gh-hovercard "12499" "rewrite of the time services" >}} to resolve the issue, or “only” almost nine thousand lines of code.
The new implementation is much more accurate, allowing Pokéjobs and other timed events to finally be enjoyed normally in this low-poly, almost-always-30-FPS masterpiece.

{{< single-title-imgs
    "Get to work! (Pokémon Sword)"
    "./pj1.png"
    "./pj2.png"
    >}}

Continuing this work, Maide removed some old workarounds that were no longer needed in the time services, and fixed {{< gh-hovercard "12864" "network clock to local clock" >}} synchronisation on every game boot.
This fixed time progression in `Pokémon Quest`.
No longer a Time Quest.

{{< imgs
	"./pq.png| Set camp (Pokémon Quest)"
  >}}

To close the section, byte[] fixed how the {{< gh-hovercard "12867" "AOC service" >}} lists available DLC for multi-program applications, allowing `Assassin’s Creed Rogue` to boot with its DLC installed.
Just like the Navy intended.

## Graphics changes

### A dose of Dozen

> Unforeseen issues are one of the signatures “comes with the job” of emulation–you never know from where a new problem will arise, so we’ll have to start this section with a PSA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unforeseen issues are one of the signature “comes with the job” moments of emulation — you never know from where a new problem will arise, so we’ll have to start this section with a PSA.
```

AMD and Intel users running Windows 11 suddenly started having their hardware completely incapable of launching any games while using Vulkan.
The reason is something none of us expected at all, Microsoft… And Mesa! Please lower those pitchforks.

Microsoft decided to roll out an install of this package, which allows incapable hardware to run the mentioned APIs if no proper driver was provided from the hardware vendor, or just if the hardware is incapable of running it.

The project used to achieve this is Mesa `Dozen`, which [runs Vulkan atop a Direct3D 12 interface](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/mesa/mesa/-/merge_requests/14766).
The intended purpose is to offer Vulkan support to devices that only ship a Direct3D 12 driver, for example, Qualcomm ARM laptops.
We don’t know why Microsoft decided to silently test this feature on x86-64 PCs that already ship hardware capable of proper Vulkan support, but here we are.

Those new devices generated by Dozen are added to the Vulkan devices available to the OS, named “Microsoft Direct3D 12 (GPU model name)”, and conflict with how yuzu orders its device list.

> To ensure the best GPU is selected by default on yuzu, three sorts are performed, in order:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure the best GPU is selected by default on yuzu, three sorts are performed in order:
```

> - Prefer NVIDIA hardware over AMD, AMD hardware over Intel. This favours NVIDIA hardware and also double ensures dedicated GPUs get selected over integrated ones. Plus, in the rare case an user has multiple GPUs of different vendors on a system, we ensure the one with the least issues is picked by default. “Outdated NVIDIA tablet-turned-console likes NVIDIA drivers,” after all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Prefer NVIDIA hardware over AMD, AMD hardware over Intel. This favours NVIDIA hardware and also double ensures dedicated GPUs get selected over integrated ones. Plus, in the rare case a user has multiple GPUs from different vendors on a system, we ensure the one with the least issues is picked by default. “Outdated NVIDIA tablet-turned-console likes NVIDIA drivers,” after all.
```

As an Android user pointed out, some hardcore mods like `Luminescent Platinum` for `Pokémon Brilliant Diamond/Shining Pearl` would get stuck in a black screen while using NCE.

After the detective work was finished by byte[], the reason was found to be in how some mods make assumptions about the module layout, and yuzu would try to give each module a dedicated patch section.
To alleviate this bottleneck, [GPUCode](https://github.com/GPUCode) modified
the {{< gh-hovercard "12677" "NCE loader" >}} to try to use the same patch section for as many sequential modules as possible.

{{< imgs
	"./platinum.jpg| The community never fails to provide impressive mods (Pokémon Brilliant Diamond)"
  >}}

This should allow mods for other games that make assumptions about module layout to work under NCE as well.

Jumping to a bit of input changes, german77 got notified that a user tried to dump their Amiibos but yuzu failed to generate any dump because the Amiibos were mounted as read-only and no backup was available.
The solution? {{< gh-hovercard "12683" "Dump Amiibos" >}} if no backup exists, no questions asked.

> Resident helper [anpilley](https://github.com/anpilley) decided it was time to improve the available command-line arguments for the yuzu binaries, adding the use of `-u` to specify an {{< gh-hovercard "12695" "user to load" >}} and suppress the user selector from showing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Resident helper [anpilley](https://github.com/anpilley) decided it was time to improve the available command-line arguments for the yuzu binaries, adding the use of `-u` to specify a {{< gh-hovercard "12695" "user to load" >}} and suppress the user selector from showing.
```

Thank you!

Back for more, [FearlessTobi](https://github.com/FearlessTobi) decides to tackle a few problems with the virtual file system emulation, or `VFS`.
Since Project Gaia is in indefinite hiatus, priorities have shifted into patching as much of the current implementation as possible.

The {{< gh-hovercard "12707" "list of changes" >}} is long: it includes moving files, unifying error code naming for ease of debugging, making file system definitions more consistent with current reverse engineering information available, and leaving the overall structure prepared for future code additions.
Never hurts to improve an area that was designed back when there was little information available.

The boss of Dynarmic herself, [merryhime](https://github.com/merryhime), {{< gh-hovercard "12830" "updated the bundled build" >}} in yuzu to the latest version, bringing some new changes and fixes with it.

> There are some instruction emulation optimizations, more 32-bit ARM instructions were added, and the startup times of games on Android was improved–it’s not as fast as NCE, but it’s considerably faster for those games that must run on JIT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are some instruction emulation optimizations, more 32-bit ARM instructions were added, and the startup times of games on Android was improved — it’s not as fast as NCE, but it’s considerably faster for those games that must run on JIT.
```

To close this section and move to an interesting hardware discussion, t895 has one last gift for us this month, {{< gh-hovercard "12868" "per-game audio settings." >}}
One of the missing settings that could be set on a per-game basis, and it includes the full set, output engine, output device, input device, etc.

{{< imgs
	"./audio.gif| Sounds good to me!"
  >}}

The more you’re able to choose, the better, right?

## Hardware and software section

> As promised last month, we’ll talk about frame generation, and the new tools available to take advantage of it on yuzu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As promised last month, we’ll talk about frame generation, and the new tools available to take advantage of it in yuzu.
```

But first, one last HDR example for NVIDIA users.

### NVIDIA TrueHDR

With the 551.XX series of drivers, NVIDIA introduced the option to auto-generate an HDR output for any video displayed on a Chromium-based browser (Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Brave, etc).

> It didn’t take long for the community to come up with plug-ins to take advantage of this change on [local video players](https://github.com/emoose/VideoRenderer/releases), but that’s not the only application outside NVIDIA’s official intended use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It didn’t take long for the community to come up with plug-ins to take advantage of this change in [local video players](https://github.com/emoose/VideoRenderer/releases), but that’s not the only application outside NVIDIA’s official intended use.
```

Enter [NvTrueHDR](https://www.nexusmods.com/site/mods/781), an alternative to Windows AutoHDR and Special K HDR.
Always fun to have more options to pick from!

### Lossless Scaling to the rescue

[Lossless Scaling](https://store.steampowered.com/app/993090/Lossless_Scaling/), a program intended for resolution scaling, recently introduced a generic frame generation option, making it the first vendor agnostic implementation.

{{< imgs
	"./ls1.png| Clean UI"
  >}}

> Usage is simple, set Frame Generation to the right to `LSFG`, if you’re an Intel iGPU user, set Legacy capture API to enabled, open yuzu, enable Scale and switch back to playing your game, or press the default hotkey Ctrl + Alt + S while in game. Exclusive fullscreen recommended.

Reviewer: @```suggestion
Simply set Frame Generation on the right to `LSFG`. If you’re an Intel iGPU user, set Legacy capture API to enabled, open yuzu, enable Scale, and switch back to playing your game, or press the default hotkey `Ctrl + Alt + S` while in-game. Exclusive fullscreen is recommended.
```

{{< imgs
	"./ls2.png| Scroll down to find it"
  >}}

> The results are good on smaller displays, but on larger packages like your writer’s 27 inches, the artifacts of the generated frames are too noticeable, making this tool more suitable for laptops and handhelds than for desktop or TV gameplay.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The results are good on smaller displays, but on larger monitors (such as 27 inch displays), the artifacts of the generated frames are too noticeable, making this tool more suitable for laptops and handhelds than for desktop or TV gameplay.
```

Still, it’s a cheap way of improving perceived framerates and bypassing CPU bottlenecks on any GPU vendor without driver or hardware restrictions.

> Here you can see native 30 FPS vs Lossless Scaling generating frames to 60 FPS videos on `The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild`. 
> Due to upload size and bandwidth limitations from your writer’s ISP, we're using YouTube, which will limit the framerate to 60 FPS, losing detail on the 120 FPS framegen examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below you can see comparison videos between native 30 FPS and Lossless Scaling generating frames to 60 FPS in `The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild`. 
Due to YouTube only supporting 60FPS video, you won't see the true 120 FPS framegen examples.
```

{{< youtube v-U7GJYrY64 >}} {{< youtube XNBTxr6HBlA >}}

> Native 30 FPS vs Lossless Scaling generating frames with a 30 FPS base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above videos demonstrate native 30 FPS vs Lossless Scaling generating frames from a 30 FPS base.
```

You can see with so little information, artifacts are common. Lossless Scaling doesn’t handle scene transitions.

{{< youtube CG_e5yOnd9E >}} {{< youtube UpvdLJUtEis >}}

> Native 60 FPS vs Lossless Scaling generating frames with a 60 FPS base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above videos demonstrate native 60 FPS vs Lossless Scaling generating frames from a 60 FPS base.
```

With more information to play with, Lossless Scaling does a better job. Scene transitions are still an issue.

> While the quality is not perfect, it’s a simple and harmless way of improving the experience on any hardware–especially on ~~ugly~~ 30 FPS games like the Pokémon series, or cinematic experiences like the Xenoblade saga. No double standards here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the quality is not perfect, it’s a simple and harmless way of improving the experience on any hardware — especially on ~~ugly~~ 30 FPS games like the Pokémon series, or cinematic experiences like the Xenoblade saga. No double standards here.
```

Still, for those with recent AMD GPUs (RDNA2 and RDNA3 so far), there’s a better option available now:

### AMD Fluid Motion Frames

> Driver release 24.1.1 introduced the first public release of [AFMF](https://community.amd.com/t5/gaming/amd-fluid-motion-frames-is-out-now-on-amd-radeon-rx-7000-series/ba-p/634372), AMD’s game independent frame generation algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Driver release 24.1.1 introduced the first public release of [AFMF](https://community.amd.com/t5/gaming/amd-fluid-motion-frames-is-out-now-on-amd-radeon-rx-7000-series/ba-p/634372), AMD’s game-independent frame generation algorithm.
```

> “But writer, AFMF is only for Direct3D 11 and 12 games!” You say.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
“But writer, AFMF is only for Direct3D 11 and 12 games!” you say.
```

> That’s where you’re wrong, you see, the [Guru3D forums](https://forums.guru3d.com/threads/amd-software-adrenalin-edition-23-40-01-10-preview-driver-for-amd-fluid-motion-frames.449598/page-35#post-6197794) got some fantastic information, AFMF can be run on Vulkan, OpenGL, and Direct3D 9/10 too, it only needs a registry edit:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That’s where you’re wrong. You see, the [Guru3D forums](https://forums.guru3d.com/threads/amd-software-adrenalin-edition-23-40-01-10-preview-driver-for-amd-fluid-motion-frames.449598/page-35#post-6197794) has some fantastic information, AFMF can be run on Vulkan, OpenGL, and Direct3D 9/10 too, it only needs a registry edit:
```

```
[HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\AMD\DVR]
"GFGEnableAPI"=dword:00000007
```

> Manually make this change with regedit, reboot Windows if needed, add yuzu to Radeon Software, set Wait for vertical refresh to Disabled, enable AMD Fluid Motion Frames:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manually make this change with regedit, reboot Windows if needed, add yuzu to the Radeon Software, set `Wait for Vertical Refresh` to `Disabled`, enable AMD Fluid Motion Frames:
```

{{< imgs
	"./radeon.png| Good looking UI, AMD"
  >}}

> In the performance tab, you can set the overlay to show the generated frames performance (it won’t show up on regular apps or yuzu, as it isn’t informed by the game engine), along with latency and stuttering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the performance tab, you can set the overlay to show the generated frames' performance (it won’t show up on regular apps or yuzu, as it isn’t informed by the game engine), along with latency and stuttering.
```

Open yuzu, set Fullscreen Mode to Exclusive Fullscreen:

{{< imgs
	"./fullscreen.png| It’s as shrimple as that"
  >}}

And that’s it, start a game, go into fullscreen by pressing F11 or the hotkey assigned to your controller, and enjoy 2x to 3x the perceived framerate.

> Note that while the image quality is much better than the result from Lossless Scaling, AMD disables AFMF if there is too much variance between one frame and the next in order to avoid smoothing out scene transitions like camera changes or opening the menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that, while the image quality is much better than the result from Lossless Scaling, AMD disables AFMF if there is too much variance between one frame and the next in order to avoid smoothing out scene transitions like camera changes or opening the menu.
```

This leads to a noticeable frametime inconsistency when a lot of action is happening on screen. We hope AMD adds an option in the future to toggle the sensitivity of this behaviour.

{{< youtube v-U7GJYrY64 >}} {{< youtube 8Cbov_uR2Dc >}}

> Native 30 FPS vs AFMF generating frames with a 30 FPS base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above videos demonstrate native 30 FPS vs AFMF generating frames from a 30 FPS base.
```

While a better result than Lossless Scaling at 30 FPS, artifacts are still noticeable in faster movements, especially on vegetation. Scene transitions are clear and there is less shimmering around the player.

{{< youtube CG_e5yOnd9E >}} {{< youtube GfRjc9v0jls >}}

> Native 60 FPS vs AFMF generating frames with a 60 FPS base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above videos demonstrate native 60 FPS vs AFMF generating frames from a 60 FPS base.
```

> And at 60 FPS the results are great, providing smooth gameplay to 120-180Hz displays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And at 60 FPS, the results are great! Allowing for smoother gameplay on 120-180Hz displays.
```

No performance graphs are included because your writer doesn’t consider perceived framerate as real performance, but to provide an example, `The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom`, which produces solid 60 FPS in open world with a 5600X and an RTX 3060 Ti, can produce 170-180 “FPS” with AFMF enabled, and with little to no distortion visible.

The games can be rendered with an NVIDIA or Intel GPU while still generating frames with AFMF, although the experience is slightly worse than just using the AMD card directly due to the added latency of transmitting the finished frames over PCIe.
The only requisite for AFMF to work is to have the display connected to the compatible AMD GPU, any other GPU can do the actual rendering after that.
Time to invest in an RX 6400? Smash must look amazing at 240 FPS.

### Intel delivering on its promises

> As promised, Intel fixed [their crashes](https://github.com/IGCIT/Intel-GPU-Community-Issue-Tracker-IGCIT/issues/551) while building geometry shaders starting with driver version [31.0.101.5186/5234](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/download/785597/intel-arc-iris-xe-graphics-windows.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As promised, Intel fixed [their crashes](https://github.com/IGCIT/Intel-GPU-Community-Issue-Tracker-IGCIT/issues/551) while building geometry shaders, starting with driver version [31.0.101.5186/5234](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/download/785597/intel-arc-iris-xe-graphics-windows.html).
```

While this allows for games like `Xenoblade Chronicles 3` to finally get in-game on integrated GPUs and ARC dedicated cards, it seems like there are other areas where the driver needs to mature to produce proper rendering:

{{< imgs
	"./xc3.png| Intel moment (Xenoblade Chronicles 3)"
  >}}

On the flip side, `The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom` improved stability with this driver fix, so Intel Windows specific rendering issues aside, the game should be quite playable now.

### Qualcomm

> [K11MCH1](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases/tag/v24.1.0_R16)’s driver releases continue to flow out, improving performance and compatibility for the Adreno users. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[K11MCH1](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases/tag/v24.1.0_R16)’s driver releases continue to flow out, improving performance and compatibility for Adreno users. 
```

We strongly recommend staying up-to-date.

While there have been new releases of the proprietary driver, nothing of value has been added or fixed yet.

Total Adreno moments count this month: 1.

### Exynos and Mali

> Why together? Because we found some *interesting* limitations in the Exynos hardware that made us remember of the existential crisis Mali suffers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why together? Because we found some *interesting* limitations in the Exynos hardware that reminds us of the existential crisis Mali suffers.
```

Besides the AMD specific issue we previously mentioned, Exynos’ Xclipse GPU series shares a quality with Mali: total lack of support for BC4 to BC7 texture decoding.

While this is *fine* for native Android games (developers just have to scratch their head at the decision to skip basic texture support, and use an alternative like ASTC), Switch games do use BCn textures, extensively in some cases, and adding the extra CPU work of having to decode those textures into something the GPU can handle (RGBA8) will limit performance and increase memory usage.

> This is one of the main reasons these GPUs are not on par with Adreno in terms of feature support.
> So:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is one of the main reasons these GPUs are not on par with Adreno in terms of feature support.

So:
```

Total Xclipse moments count this month: 2.

Total Mali moments count this month: 2.

## Linux

Certain distributions like SteamOS, Fedora since [version 39](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2216765), and any distro with a [linux-zen](https://github.com/zen-kernel/zen-kernel/commit/d22e337dca65bd7056e27b93c212df25a9b4c376) package available (Arch Linux for example), have significantly increased their default `vm.max_map_count` values, leading to much more stable out-of-box experiences when running Unreal engine games on yuzu.

Progress feels so good! You could learn a little, Windows.

## Future projects

Work on multiprocess support is far from over. We’re aiming to support `QLaunch`, meaning being able to boot the native game launcher, launch games from there, close them, suspend them, launch a different game, the whole deal.

{{< imgs
	"./ql1.mp4| QLaunching in 3, 2, 1! Right click the video to unmute it"
  >}}

Resuming a game works too.

{{< imgs
	"./ql2.mp4| Back and forth. Right click the video to unmute it"
  >}}

> The work on applets and multiprocess is exposing a lot of hidden bugs in multiple areas–the accuracy improvements are a very welcome addition to having this much fun testing and running the applets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The work on applets and multiprocess is exposing a lot of hidden bugs in multiple areas — the accuracy improvements are a very welcome addition; we're having so much fun testing and running the applets.
```
